.\" libzenctl.3 - manual page for libzenctl
.\"
.\" groff_man(7) source. View with: man -l man/libzenctl.3
.TH LIBZENCTL 3 "2026-01-01" "libzenctl 0.1.0" "C Library Functions"
.SH NAME
libzenctl \- C library for hardware control on Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
#include <zenctl/zenctl.h>
cc \-o myapp myapp.c \-lzenctl
.ft R
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B libzenctl
is a C library that exposes every hardware control the Linux kernel
exposes through one API. It is the real product; the
.BR zenctl (1)
CLI is a thin wrapper around it.
.PP
The library is library-first: no sysfs, procfs, ioctl, or ACPI access
happens outside it. Callers link against
.I libzenctl.so
and either use the typed per-domain API (preferred for compiled code)
or the generic key-value fallback (preferred for scripting and dynamic
access).
.PP
Kernel interfaces are used in this priority order: sysfs, then procfs,
then ioctl, then ACPI/WMI, then vendor-specific paths. Capability
detection runs at context creation: every key is marked
.BR available ,
.BR unavailable ,
or
.BR readonly ,
and calls degrade gracefully per feature. There is no hard kernel
version floor.
.SH API OVERVIEW
.SS "Context"
Every operation requires a context, allocated with
.BR zenctl_ctx_new .
The context owns the capability cache and the key-value router.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_err_t err;
zenctl_ctx_t *ctx = zenctl_ctx_new(&err);
if (!ctx) { fprintf(stderr, "%s\\n", err.message); return 1; }
/* ... use ctx ... */
zenctl_ctx_free(ctx);
.EE
.in
.SS "Error model"
Every fallible call takes a
.I zenctl_err_t *
out-parameter. On failure the function returns \-1 and fills
.IR err ;
on success it returns 0 and leaves
.I err
untouched. Callers check
.I err.code
after every call.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
typedef struct {
    int  code;
    char message[256];
    char context[256];
    bool recoverable;
} zenctl_err_t;
.EE
.in
.PP
.BR zenctl_strerror (3)
returns a static string for any error code.
.SS "Capability query"
.BR zenctl_query_cap (3)
returns one of
.BR ZENCTL_CAP_AVAILABLE ,
.BR ZENCTL_CAP_UNAVAILABLE ,
or
.BR ZENCTL_CAP_READONLY
for any key the library knows about. Call it before using a feature
so the caller can degrade or skip cleanly.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_cap_t cap = zenctl_query_cap(ctx, "cpu.0.c_states");
if (cap == ZENCTL_CAP_UNAVAILABLE) { /* skip */ }
.EE
.in
.SS "CPU"
Open a CPU by index, get and set its governor, frequency limits,
online state, SMT, and C-states.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_cpu_t *cpu = zenctl_cpu_open(0, &err);
zenctl_cpu_set_governor(cpu, "performance", &err);
int64_t max_hz;
zenctl_cpu_get_freq_max(cpu, &max_hz, &err);
zenctl_cpu_close(cpu);
.EE
.in
.SS "Memory"
Hugepages (default and per-size), THP, NUMA topology, and the
/proc/sys/vm tunables (swappiness, overcommit, vfs_cache_pressure).
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_mem_set_nr_hugepages(1024, &err);
zenctl_thp_mode_t thp;
zenctl_mem_get_thp(&thp, &err);
.EE
.in
.SS "Storage"
Open a block device by name. Scheduler, queue depth, read-ahead,
write cache, discard limits, rotational flag, I/O stats, runtime PM.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_storage_t *st = zenctl_storage_open("sda", &err);
zenctl_storage_set_scheduler(st, "mq-deadline", &err);
zenctl_io_stats_t stats;
zenctl_storage_get_io_stats(st, &stats, &err);
zenctl_storage_close(st);
.EE
.in
.SS "Network"
Open a NIC by name. Ring sizes, offload flags (TSO/GRO/GSO/RXcsum/
TXcsum), link info (speed/duplex/carrier/mtu), IRQ affinity.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_net_t *net = zenctl_net_open("eth0", &err);
zenctl_net_set_ring_rx(net, 4096, &err);
zenctl_net_set_offload_tso(net, false, &err);
zenctl_net_close(net);
.EE
.in
.SS "GPU"
Open a DRM card by index or device path. Driver and vendor strings,
temperature, fan PWM, power draw, clock. AMDGPU-specific power
profile and DPM state.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_gpu_t *gpu = zenctl_gpu_open(0, &err);
zenctl_gpu_set_fan_pwm(gpu, 128, &err);
int64_t temp_mc;
zenctl_gpu_get_temp(gpu, &temp_mc, &err);
zenctl_gpu_close(gpu);
.EE
.in
.SS "Thermal"
Open a thermal zone by name. Temperature, type, policy, mode, trip
points, cooling devices. Standalone hwmon sensor reads and fan
control.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_thermal_t *tz = zenctl_thermal_open("thermal_zone0", &err);
int32_t temp;
zenctl_thermal_get_temp(tz, &temp, &err);
zenctl_thermal_set_policy(tz, "step_wise", &err);
zenctl_thermal_close(tz);
.EE
.in
.SS "Power"
ACPI sleep states, mem_sleep mode, runtime PM for arbitrary devices,
battery info, charge thresholds, AC adapter, wakeup devices.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_power_set_mem_sleep_mode("deep", &err);
zenctl_battery_t bat;
zenctl_power_battery_get(0, &bat, &err);
zenctl_power_battery_set_charge_end(0, 80, &err);
.EE
.in
.SS "PCIe / IOMMU"
Open by PCI address. Link speed and width (current and max), ASPM
policy, runtime PM, D3cold, IOMMU group, NUMA node, vendor/device/class.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_pcie_t *pc = zenctl_pcie_open("0000:01:00.0", &err);
char *speed;
zenctl_pcie_get_link_speed(pc, &speed, &err);
free(speed);
int group;
zenctl_pcie_get_iommu_group(pc, &group, &err);
zenctl_pcie_close(pc);
.EE
.in
.SS "USB"
Open a USB device by sysfs path (e.g. "1-2"). Device identification,
runtime PM, autosuspend, authorized flag, wakeup, reset, enumerate.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_usb_t *usb = zenctl_usb_open("1-2", &err);
zenctl_usb_set_autosuspend_delay(usb, 2000, &err);
zenctl_usb_reset(usb, &err);
zenctl_usb_close(usb);
.EE
.in
.SS "Bluetooth"
Open an adapter by name (e.g. "hci0"). Powered state via rfkill
soft-block, BD_ADDR via HCIGETDEVINFO, enumerate.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_bt_t *bt = zenctl_bt_open("hci0", &err);
zenctl_bt_set_powered(bt, false, &err);
char *addr;
zenctl_bt_get_address(bt, &addr, &err);
free(addr);
zenctl_bt_close(bt);
.EE
.in
.SS "Wireless"
Open a Wi-Fi PHY by name (e.g. "phy0"). Regulatory domain, TX power,
802.11 power-save (setters return ENOTSUP in v1 pending nl80211),
rfkill soft-block, enumerate.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_wireless_t *wl = zenctl_wireless_open("phy0", &err);
char *regd;
zenctl_wireless_get_regdomain(wl, &regd, &err);
free(regd);
zenctl_wireless_close(wl);
.EE
.in
.SS "Firmware"
DMI/SMBIOS fields, EFI variables (efivarfs), ACPI tables, and
firmware-attributes (BIOS) settings. EFI and BIOS writes require
root.
.PP
.in +4
.EX
char *vendor;
zenctl_fw_dmi_get("sys_vendor", &vendor, &err);
free(vendor);

uint8_t *data; size_t n;
zenctl_fw_efi_get("BootOrder",
    "8be4df61-93ca-11d2-aa0d-00e098032b8c",
    &data, &n, &err);
free(data);
.EE
.in
.SS "Generic key-value API"
For scripting, dynamic access, or keys not known at compile time.
.TP
.BI "int zenctl_get(zenctl_ctx_t *" ctx ", const char *" key ", zenctl_val_t *" out ", zenctl_err_t *" err ")"
Fetch the value at
.IR key .
The caller owns
.I out
and must call
.BR zenctl_val_free (3)
on it.
.TP
.BI "int zenctl_set(zenctl_ctx_t *" ctx ", const char *" key ", const char *" value ", zenctl_err_t *" err ")"
Set the value at
.IR key .
.I value
is a string; the library converts per the key's type.
.TP
.BI "zenctl_key_iter_t *zenctl_keys(zenctl_ctx_t *" ctx ", const char *" prefix ", zenctl_err_t *" err ")"
Iterate every key beginning with
.IR prefix .
Use
.BR zenctl_key_iter_next (3)
and
.BR zenctl_key_iter_free (3).
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_val_t val;
zenctl_get(ctx, "cpu.0.governor", &val, &err);
printf("%s\\n", val.v.s);
zenctl_val_free(&val);

zenctl_set(ctx, "cpu.0.governor", "performance", &err);
.EE
.in
.SH "ERROR MODEL"
.SS "zenctl_err_t"
Passed by pointer to every fallible function. On error
.I code
is set to one of the
.B ZENCTL_ERR_*
constants,
.I message
holds a short human-readable string,
.I context
holds the offending key or path when applicable, and
.I recoverable
is true when the caller can continue (e.g. capability missing).
.SS "Error codes"
.TP
.B ZENCTL_OK
Success. Always 0.
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_EPERM
Permission denied. Caller is not root for a write, or lacks
CAP_SYS_ADMIN on a privileged read.
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_ENOENT
The key, device, or file does not exist.
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_EINVAL
The caller passed an invalid argument (bad range, bad enum, bad path
shape).
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_EIO
A read or write to a sysfs, procfs, or efivarfs file failed.
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_ENOTSUP
The capability is unavailable on this kernel or hardware, or the
operation requires a feature not built into the library (e.g. nl80211
setters in v1).
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_ERANGE
A numeric write was outside the kernel-reported min/max.
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_NOMEM
Out of memory.
.TP
.B ZENCTL_ERR_INTERNAL
An invariant was violated. File a bug.
.SS "zenctl_strerror"
.PP
.in +4
.EX
const char *zenctl_strerror(int code);
.EE
.in
.PP
Returns a static string for any error code, including unknown codes.
Safe to call with any int.
.SH "CAPABILITY QUERY"
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl_cap_t zenctl_query_cap(zenctl_ctx_t *ctx, const char *key);
.EE
.in
.PP
Returns the capability of the key at
.IR key ,
without touching hardware. Result is one of:
.TP
.B ZENCTL_CAP_UNAVAILABLE
The kernel or hardware does not expose this control. Calls into the
key return
.BR ZENCTL_ERR_ENOTSUP .
.TP
.B ZENCTL_CAP_AVAILABLE
The control is present and writable (subject to privilege).
.TP
.B ZENCTL_CAP_READONLY
The control is present but read-only. Setters return
.BR ZENCTL_ERR_EPERM .
.PP
Keys use dotted paths:
.IR cpu.0.governor ,
.IR storage.sda.scheduler ,
.IR thermal.thermal_zone0.temp ,
.IR gpu.0.fan_pwm ,
etc. The exact set of keys is what
.BR zenctl_keys (3)
enumerates.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B ZENCTL_SYSFS_PREFIX
Override the sysfs root. Defaults to
.IR /sys .
Used by the unit test suite to point at a mocked sysfs tree.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib/libzenctl.so
The shared library. A symlink to
.IR libzenctl.so.1 .
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib/libzenctl.so.1
Soname symlink to the versioned library.
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib/libzenctl.so.1.0.0
The versioned shared object.
.TP
.I /usr/local/include/zenctl/
The public headers. Include
.I zenctl/zenctl.h
to get everything.
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib/pkgconfig/zenctl.pc
pkg-config file. Use with
.BR pkg-config (1):
.sp
.in +4
.EX
gcc $(pkg-config --cflags --libs zenctl) myapp.c
.EE
.in
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR zenctl (1),
.BR pkg-config (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Rui-727
.SH LICENSE
GPL-2.0-or-later. See
.I /usr/local/share/licenses/zenctl/LICENSE
or
.UR https://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html
the FSF GPL page
.UE
for the full text.
