.\" zenctl.1 - manual page for the zenctl CLI
.\"
.\" groff_man(7) source. View with: man -l man/zenctl.1
.TH ZENCTL 1 "2026-01-01" "zenctl 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zenctl \- hardware control for Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SY zenctl
.OP domain subcommand
.OP target
.OP options
.YS
.SY zenctl
.BR profile " " \fBsave\fR|\fBload\fR|\fBlist\fR|\fBdelete\fR " " \fIname\fR
.YS
.SY zenctl
.B caps
.RI [ domain ]
.YS
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zenctl
is a thin command-line wrapper around
.BR libzenctl (3).
It reads and writes hardware controls exposed by the Linux kernel
through sysfs, procfs, ioctl, and ACPI/WMI. Every hardware operation
the CLI performs is a call into the library; no sysfs path, ioctl, or
EFI variable is touched directly by the binary.
.PP
The CLI does argument parsing, output formatting (human-readable table
or JSON), and privilege checks. Writes require root. Destructive writes
require an explicit
.B \-\-confirm
flag or an interactive prompt.
.B \-\-dry\-run
is available on every write subcommand.
.PP
Domains: cpu, mem, storage, net, gpu, thermal, power, pcie, usb, bt,
wireless, firmware.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS "cpu \- CPU controls"
.TP
.B zenctl cpu get governor \-\-cpu N
Print the active cpufreq governor for CPU N.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu set governor NAME \-\-cpu N|\fBall\fR
Set the cpufreq governor (e.g. performance, powersave, schedutil).
.TP
.B zenctl cpu get freq\-min \-\-cpu N
Print the minimum scaling frequency in Hz.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu set freq\-min HZ \-\-cpu N|\fBall\fR
Set the minimum scaling frequency.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu get freq\-max \-\-cpu N
Print the maximum scaling frequency in Hz.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu set freq\-max HZ \-\-cpu N|\fBall\fR
Set the maximum scaling frequency.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu get online \-\-cpu N
Print whether CPU N is online.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu set online on|off \-\-cpu N
Bring CPU N online or take it offline. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl cpu get smt\-active
Print whether SMT is active.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu set smt\-active on|off
Enable or disable SMT. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl cpu get cstate\-disable STATE \-\-cpu N
Print whether C-state STATE is disabled on CPU N.
.TP
.B zenctl cpu set cstate\-disable STATE on|off \-\-cpu N
Disable or enable a C-state.
.SS "mem \- memory, hugepages, NUMA, VM tunables"
.TP
.B zenctl mem get nr\-hugepages
Print the number of default-size hugepages reserved.
.TP
.B zenctl mem set nr\-hugepages N
Set the number of default-size hugepages.
.TP
.B zenctl mem get hugepage\-size
Print the default hugepage size in bytes.
.TP
.B zenctl mem get nr\-hugepages\-size SIZE_KB
Print the number of hugepages reserved at size SIZE_KB (e.g. 2048, 1048576).
.TP
.B zenctl mem set nr\-hugepages\-size SIZE_KB N
Set the number of hugepages for the given page size.
.TP
.B zenctl mem get thp
Print the transparent huge pages mode (always, madvise, never).
.TP
.B zenctl mem set thp always|madvise|never
Set the THP mode.
.TP
.B zenctl mem numa node\-count
Print the number of NUMA nodes (0 on non-NUMA systems).
.TP
.B zenctl mem numa get NODE
Print NUMA node NODE's memory totals and CPU mask.
.TP
.B zenctl mem get swappiness
Print /proc/sys/vm/swappiness.
.TP
.B zenctl mem set swappiness 0..200
Set vm.swappiness.
.TP
.B zenctl mem get overcommit
Print /proc/sys/vm/overcommit_memory.
.TP
.B zenctl mem set overcommit 0|1|2
Set vm.overcommit_memory.
.TP
.B zenctl mem get vfs\-cache\-pressure
Print /proc/sys/vm/vfs_cache_pressure.
.TP
.B zenctl mem set vfs\-cache\-pressure N
Set vm.vfs_cache_pressure.
.SS "storage \- block device controls"
.TP
.B zenctl storage get scheduler \-\-dev DEV
Print the active I/O scheduler for DEV.
.TP
.B zenctl storage set scheduler NAME \-\-dev DEV
Set the I/O scheduler (e.g. mq-deadline, bfq, none, kyber).
.TP
.B zenctl storage list schedulers \-\-dev DEV
Print every scheduler the kernel exposes for DEV, with the active one bracketed.
.TP
.B zenctl storage get queue\-depth \-\-dev DEV
Print the hardware queue depth.
.TP
.B zenctl storage set queue\-depth N \-\-dev DEV
Set the hardware queue depth (SCSI only; NVMe is read-only).
.TP
.B zenctl storage get read\-ahead \-\-dev DEV
Print read-ahead in kB.
.TP
.B zenctl storage set read\-ahead KB \-\-dev DEV
Set read-ahead in kB.
.TP
.B zenctl storage get cache\-type \-\-dev DEV
Print the write cache mode.
.TP
.B zenctl storage set cache\-type TYPE \-\-dev DEV
Set the write cache mode (write-back, write-through, none, write-back-fua).
.TP
.B zenctl storage get discard\-max \-\-dev DEV
Print the maximum discard bytes per request.
.TP
.B zenctl storage get rotational \-\-dev DEV
Print whether DEV is rotational.
.TP
.B zenctl storage get io\-stats \-\-dev DEV
Print the 17-field I/O stats line from /sys/block/<dev>/stat.
.TP
.B zenctl storage get power\-control \-\-dev DEV
Print the runtime PM mode (on, auto).
.TP
.B zenctl storage set power\-control MODE \-\-dev DEV
Set the runtime PM mode.
.SS "net \- NIC controls"
.TP
.B zenctl net get ring\-rx \-\-iface IFACE
Print the RX ring buffer size.
.TP
.B zenctl net get ring\-rx\-max \-\-iface IFACE
Print the hardware RX ring maximum.
.TP
.B zenctl net set ring\-rx N \-\-iface IFACE
Set the RX ring size.
.TP
.B zenctl net get ring\-tx \-\-iface IFACE
Print the TX ring buffer size.
.TP
.B zenctl net get ring\-tx\-max \-\-iface IFACE
Print the hardware TX ring maximum.
.TP
.B zenctl net set ring\-tx N \-\-iface IFACE
Set the TX ring size.
.TP
.BI "zenctl net get|set offload\-tso " "on|off \-\-iface IFACE"
Get or set the TSO offload flag.
.TP
.BI "zenctl net get|set offload\-gro " "on|off \-\-iface IFACE"
Get or set the GRO offload flag.
.TP
.BI "zenctl net get|set offload\-gso " "on|off \-\-iface IFACE"
Get or set the GSO offload flag.
.TP
.BI "zenctl net get|set offload\-rxcsum " "on|off \-\-iface IFACE"
Get or set the RX checksum offload flag.
.TP
.BI "zenctl net get|set offload\-txcsum " "on|off \-\-iface IFACE"
Get or set the TX checksum offload flag.
.TP
.B zenctl net get speed \-\-iface IFACE
Print the link speed in Mbps.
.TP
.B zenctl net get duplex \-\-iface IFACE
Print the duplex mode.
.TP
.B zenctl net get link \-\-iface IFACE
Print whether the link is up.
.TP
.B zenctl net get mtu \-\-iface IFACE
Print the MTU.
.TP
.B zenctl net set mtu N \-\-iface IFACE
Set the MTU.
.TP
.B zenctl net get irq \-\-iface IFACE
Print the IRQ number for IFACE.
.TP
.B zenctl net get irq\-affinity \-\-iface IFACE
Print the IRQ smp_affinity cpumask (hex).
.TP
.B zenctl net set irq\-affinity MASK \-\-iface IFACE
Set the IRQ smp_affinity cpumask.
.SS "gpu \- GPU controls"
.TP
.B zenctl gpu get driver \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the DRM driver name.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu get vendor \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the GPU vendor string.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu get temp \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the GPU temperature in millidegrees Celsius.
.TP
.BI "zenctl gpu get|set fan\-pwm " "N \-\-dev N|PATH"
Get or set the fan PWM value (0-255).
.TP
.BI "zenctl gpu get|set fan\-auto " "on|off \-\-dev N|PATH"
Get or set the fan auto-control mode.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu get power \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the current power draw in microwatts.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu get freq \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the current GPU clock in MHz.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu amdgpu get power\-profile \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the AMDGPU power profile.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu amdgpu set power\-profile NAME \-\-dev N|PATH
Set the AMDGPU power profile.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu amdgpu get dpm\-state \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the AMDGPU DPM state.
.TP
.B zenctl gpu amdgpu get busy\-percent \-\-dev N|PATH
Print the AMDGPU busy percentage.
.SS "thermal \- thermal zones, cooling devices, hwmon"
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get temp \-\-zone ZONE
Print the zone temperature in millidegrees Celsius.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get type \-\-zone ZONE
Print the zone type string.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get policy \-\-zone ZONE
Print the active thermal governor.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal set policy NAME \-\-zone ZONE
Set the thermal governor.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal list policies \-\-zone ZONE
Print every policy the kernel exposes for ZONE.
.TP
.BI "zenctl thermal get|set mode " "on|off \-\-zone ZONE"
Get or set the thermal zone enabled mode.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get trip\-count \-\-zone ZONE
Print the number of trip points.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get trip INDEX \-\-zone ZONE
Print the trip point at INDEX (temp, type, hysteresis).
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get cooling\-count \-\-zone ZONE
Print the number of cooling devices bound to ZONE.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal get cooling INDEX \-\-zone ZONE
Print the cooling device at INDEX (type, cur_state, max_state).
.TP
.B zenctl thermal set cooling\-state INDEX STATE \-\-zone ZONE
Set the cur_state of cooling device INDEX.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal hwmon count
Print the number of hwmon devices.
.TP
.B zenctl thermal hwmon get\-temp HWMON SENSOR
Print one hwmon temperature sensor reading.
.TP
.BI "zenctl thermal hwmon get|set fan\-pwm " "HWMON FAN N"
Get or set a hwmon fan PWM value.
.TP
.BI "zenctl thermal hwmon get|set fan\-auto " "HWMON FAN on|off"
Get or set a hwmon fan auto-control mode.
.SS "power \- sleep states, runtime PM, battery, AC, wake sources"
.TP
.B zenctl power get supported\-states
Print the supported ACPI sleep states.
.TP
.B zenctl power suspend freeze|mem|disk|standby
Enter the given sleep state. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl power get mem\-sleep\-mode
Print the mem_sleep mode (s2idle, shallow, deep).
.TP
.B zenctl power set mem\-sleep\-mode MODE
Set the mem_sleep mode.
.TP
.B zenctl power get runtime\-pm \-\-dev PATH
Print the runtime PM mode for a device path.
.TP
.B zenctl power set runtime\-pm MODE \-\-dev PATH
Set the runtime PM mode for a device path.
.TP
.B zenctl power battery count
Print the number of batteries.
.TP
.B zenctl power battery get INDEX
Print battery INDEX's status, capacity, and charge.
.TP
.B zenctl power battery get\-charge\-start INDEX
Print the charge-start threshold.
.TP
.B zenctl power battery set\-charge\-start INDEX PCT
Set the charge-start threshold.
.TP
.B zenctl power battery get\-charge\-end INDEX
Print the charge-end threshold.
.TP
.B zenctl power battery set\-charge\-end INDEX PCT
Set the charge-end threshold.
.TP
.B zenctl power get ac\-online
Print whether the AC adapter is online.
.TP
.B zenctl power get wakeup\-devices
Print the list of configured wakeup devices.
.SS "pcie \- PCIe link, ASPM, IOMMU, runtime PM"
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get link\-speed \-\-addr ADDR
Print the current PCIe link speed string.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get link\-width \-\-addr ADDR
Print the current PCIe link width (lane count).
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get max\-link\-speed \-\-addr ADDR
Print the maximum supported link speed.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get max\-link\-width \-\-addr ADDR
Print the maximum supported link width.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get aspm\-policy
Print the global ASPM policy string.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get power\-control \-\-addr ADDR
Print the device runtime PM mode.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie set power\-control MODE \-\-addr ADDR
Set the device runtime PM mode.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get d3cold\-allowed \-\-addr ADDR
Print whether D3cold is allowed for the device.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie set d3cold\-allowed on|off \-\-addr ADDR
Allow or disallow D3cold. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get iommu\-group \-\-addr ADDR
Print the IOMMU group ID for the device.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get numa\-node \-\-addr ADDR
Print the NUMA node for the device (-1 if unknown).
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get vendor\-id \-\-addr ADDR
Print the PCI vendor ID.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get device\-id \-\-addr ADDR
Print the PCI device ID.
.TP
.B zenctl pcie get class \-\-addr ADDR
Print the PCI class code.
.SS "usb \- USB devices"
.TP
.B zenctl usb get vendor\-id \-\-dev PATH
Print the USB vendor ID.
.TP
.B zenctl usb get product\-id \-\-dev PATH
Print the USB product ID.
.TP
.B zenctl usb get manufacturer \-\-dev PATH
Print the manufacturer string.
.TP
.B zenctl usb get product \-\-dev PATH
Print the product string.
.TP
.B zenctl usb get speed \-\-dev PATH
Print the raw speed sysfs string.
.TP
.B zenctl usb get power\-control \-\-dev PATH
Print the runtime PM mode.
.TP
.B zenctl usb set power\-control MODE \-\-dev PATH
Set the runtime PM mode (auto, on).
.TP
.B zenctl usb get autosuspend\-delay \-\-dev PATH
Print the autosuspend delay in ms.
.TP
.B zenctl usb set autosuspend\-delay MS \-\-dev PATH
Set the autosuspend delay.
.TP
.B zenctl usb get runtime\-status \-\-dev PATH
Print the runtime status (active, suspended, unsupported).
.TP
.B zenctl usb get authorized \-\-dev PATH
Print whether the device is authorized.
.TP
.B zenctl usb set authorized on|off \-\-dev PATH
Authorize or deauthorize a device. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl usb get wakeup \-\-dev PATH
Print whether remote wakeup is enabled.
.TP
.B zenctl usb set wakeup on|off \-\-dev PATH
Enable or disable remote wakeup.
.TP
.B zenctl usb reset \-\-dev PATH
Reset the device via USBDEVFS_RESET. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl usb enumerate
List every USB device path under /sys/bus/usb/devices/.
.SS "bt \- Bluetooth adapters"
.TP
.B zenctl bt get powered \-\-adapter NAME
Print whether the adapter is powered.
.TP
.B zenctl bt set powered on|off \-\-adapter NAME
Power the adapter on or off (via rfkill soft-block).
.TP
.B zenctl bt get rfkill\-blocked \-\-adapter NAME
Print the rfkill soft-block state.
.TP
.B zenctl bt set rfkill\-blocked on|off \-\-adapter NAME
Set the rfkill soft-block state.
.TP
.B zenctl bt get address \-\-adapter NAME
Print the adapter BD_ADDR.
.TP
.B zenctl bt enumerate
List every adapter under /sys/class/bluetooth/.
.SS "wireless \- Wi-Fi / cfg80211"
.TP
.B zenctl wireless get regdomain \-\-phy NAME
Print the regulatory domain (ISO 3166-1 alpha-2).
.TP
.B zenctl wireless set regdomain CC \-\-phy NAME
Set the regulatory domain. Requires nl80211 (may return ENOTSUP in v1).
.TP
.B zenctl wireless get txpower \-\-phy NAME
Print the TX power in mBm.
.TP
.B zenctl wireless set txpower MBM \-\-phy NAME
Set the TX power. Requires nl80211 (may return ENOTSUP in v1).
.TP
.B zenctl wireless get power\-save \-\-phy NAME
Print whether 802.11 power-save is enabled.
.TP
.B zenctl wireless set power\-save on|off \-\-phy NAME
Set 802.11 power-save. Requires nl80211 (may return ENOTSUP in v1).
.TP
.B zenctl wireless get rfkill\-blocked \-\-phy NAME
Print the rfkill soft-block state.
.TP
.B zenctl wireless set rfkill\-blocked on|off \-\-phy NAME
Set the rfkill soft-block state.
.TP
.B zenctl wireless enumerate
List every phy under /sys/class/ieee80211/.
.SS "firmware \- DMI, EFI, ACPI, BIOS settings"
.TP
.B zenctl firmware dmi get FIELD
Print a /sys/class/dmi/id/ FIELD (e.g. bios_vendor, sys_vendor, product_name).
.TP
.B zenctl firmware efi enumerate
List every EFI variable in /sys/firmware/efi/efivars/.
.TP
.B zenctl firmware efi get NAME GUID
Print the payload of an EFI variable.
.TP
.B zenctl firmware efi set NAME GUID ATTRS DATA
Write or create an EFI variable. Requires root.
.TP
.B zenctl firmware efi delete NAME GUID
Delete an EFI variable. Requires root. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl firmware acpi list\-tables
List every ACPI table signature present.
.TP
.B zenctl firmware acpi get\-table NAME
Print the raw bytes of ACPI table NAME (DSDT, SSDT, FACP, ...).
.TP
.B zenctl firmware bios setting\-count
Print the number of firmware-attributes settings.
.TP
.B zenctl firmware bios get\-setting INDEX
Print one BIOS setting (name, type, current_value, default_value).
.TP
.B zenctl firmware bios set\-setting NAME VALUE [PASSWORD]
Write a new value to a BIOS setting. Destructive; requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.SS "profile \- save and restore hardware state"
.TP
.B zenctl profile save NAME
Snapshot the current live state of every available domain to a TOML
profile.
.TP
.B zenctl profile load NAME
Restore a profile. Respects
.B \-\-dry\-run
and
.BR \-\-confirm .
.TP
.B zenctl profile list
List every saved profile, system and user.
.TP
.B zenctl profile delete NAME
Delete a profile. Requires
.BR \-\-confirm .
.SS "caps \- capability query"
.TP
.B zenctl caps [domain]
Print, for every key the library knows about (or every key in
.IR domain
when given), whether the capability is
.BR available ,
.BR unavailable ,
or
.BR readonly .
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-json
Emit machine-parseable JSON. The output always has a
.I "status"
field set to
.I "ok"
or
.IR "error" ,
and either a
.I "data"
field (on success) or an
.I "error"
field (on failure).
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
For any write subcommand: print the planned changes and exit 0 without
touching hardware. Available everywhere, including
.BR "profile load" .
.TP
.BR \-\-confirm
Skip the interactive Y/N prompt for destructive writes. Required (or
the prompt must be answered) for operations like disabling CPU cores,
toggling IOMMU groups, writing EFI variables, modifying ACPI S-states,
and disabling USB devices.
.TP
.BR \-\-help
Print usage and exit 0.
.TP
.BR \-\-version
Print the
.B zenctl
and
.B libzenctl
versions and exit 0.
.SH SAFETY
.SS "Reads"
Reads run immediately without a prompt. They require root only where
the underlying sysfs file or ioctl does.
.SS "Writes"
Low-risk writes (governor, scheduler, ring size, fan PWM, etc.)
execute after a one-line confirmation to stderr.
.PP
Destructive or irreversible writes require either
.B \-\-confirm
or an interactive Y/N prompt. Destructive operations include:
.IP \(bu 3
disabling CPU cores or SMT
.IP \(bu 3
changing IOMMU groups or D3cold policy
.IP \(bu 3
writing or deleting EFI variables
.IP \(bu 3
modifying ACPI S-states or entering a sleep state
.IP \(bu 3
deauthorizing or resetting USB devices
.IP \(bu 3
writing BIOS settings
.SS "Dry run"
.B \-\-dry\-run
works on every write subcommand and on
.BR "profile load" .
It prints the planned changes and the value they would be set to, then
returns 0. Nothing is written to hardware.
.SS "Privilege"
.B zenctl
is not installed setuid. Call it with
.B sudo
or as root. Every write logs to syslog at the
.B LOG_AUTH
facility with the caller uid, the command, and the values written.
.SH PROFILES
A profile is a named snapshot of hardware state stored as TOML.
.PP
System profiles live in
.IR /etc/zenctl/profiles/ ,
user profiles in
.IR ~/.config/zenctl/profiles/ .
User profiles are limited to read-only domains; only the system path
can write to privileged controls.
.PP
Profile format (abbreviated):
.PP
.in +4
.EX
schema_version = 1
profile_name   = "server-perf"

[cpu]
governor = "performance"

[storage."sda"]
scheduler = "mq-deadline"
read_ahead_kb = 256
.EE
.in
.PP
Profiles are versioned via the
.I schema_version
field for forward compatibility. Partial profiles are valid; a profile
need not cover every domain.
.PP
.B zenctl profile save NAME
captures current live state for every domain the library reports as
.BR available .
.B zenctl profile load NAME
replays the profile, applying the same
.B \-\-dry\-run
and
.B \-\-confirm
rules as direct writes.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Read the active governor on CPU 0:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl cpu get governor --cpu 0
.EE
.in
.PP
Read the temperature of thermal_zone0:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl thermal get temp --zone thermal_zone0
.EE
.in
.PP
Read the RX ring size on eth0:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl net get ring-rx --iface eth0
.EE
.in
.PP
Set every CPU to the performance governor (requires root):
.PP
.in +4
.EX
sudo zenctl cpu set governor performance --cpu all
.EE
.in
.PP
Switch sda to the mq-deadline scheduler:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
sudo zenctl storage set scheduler mq-deadline --dev sda
.EE
.in
.PP
Cap the GPU power limit on card0:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
sudo zenctl gpu set fan-pwm 128 --dev /dev/dri/card0
.EE
.in
.PP
Dry-run a max-frequency change across all CPUs (writes nothing):
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl cpu set freq-max 4000000 --cpu all --dry-run
.EE
.in
.PP
Dump every CPU value as JSON:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl caps cpu --json
.EE
.in
.PP
Save and reload a profile:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
sudo zenctl profile save server-perf
sudo zenctl profile load server-perf
.EE
.in
.PP
List profiles as JSON:
.PP
.in +4
.EX
zenctl profile list --json
.EE
.in
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/zenctl/profiles/
System profiles, written by root.
.TP
.I ~/.config/zenctl/profiles/
User profiles. Limited to read-only domains.
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/zenctl
The CLI binary.
.TP
.I /usr/local/lib/libzenctl.so*
The shared library the binary links against.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR libzenctl (3)
.SH AUTHOR
Rui-727
.SH LICENSE
MIT. See
.I /usr/local/share/licenses/zenctl/LICENSE
or
.UR https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT
the MIT license page
.UE
for the full text.
